2023-04-01-nabu-pi

---
layout: post
title: 'Setup a Raspberry Pi to Host the NABU Internet Adapter'
date: 2023-04-01
author: 'Steven B. Combs, Ph.D.'
email: 'retrocombs@icloud.com'
comments: yes
permalink: nabu-pi
category: nabu
---

I don't want to tether my NABU Personal Computer to my Mac using the RSS-422 serial connector. I'd like to be able to place the NABU anywhere in the room. To facilitate this, I decided to grab a Raspberry Pi 3 and whip up a headless Wi-Fi/SSH configuration to serve up the NABU Internet Adapter software.

----

## Table of Contents



----

## Support the Blog and Channel

Check out the [supporters page](/supporters) to learn about my amazing supporters and how you can join our community.

## Companion YouTube Video

Title: _Title_

<div style="position:relative;padding-top:56.25%;"><p><iframe src="link" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true" style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;"></iframe></p></div>

## Video Errata

None as of 2023-04-01.

## Links

**Disclosure Statement:** When you click on links to various merchants on this site and make a purchase, this can result in this site earning a commission. Affiliate programs and affiliations may include, but are not limited to Amazon and the eBay Partner Network.

1. [Item](link)

## Setup the Raspberry Pi

1. Download the Raspberry Pi Imager (brew install raspberry-pi-imager)
2. Insert SD card into the PC
2. Select the Raspberry Pi OS Lite (32-Bit) image
3. Select the SD Card
3. Modify image configuration (Wi-Fi, SSH, etc)
	4. Hostname: nabu-pi.local
	5. Login: nabu
	6. Password: v****333
3. Burn the SD card
4. Remove SD card from PC
5. Insert SD card into the Raspberry Pi
6. Plug in the Raspberry Pi power adapter
4. SSH from a PC to the Raspberry Pi with `ssh nabu@nabu-pi.local`
5. `sudo apt update` and `sudo apt upgrade`
6. `sudo raspi-config`
4. Enable the serial adapter (https://learn.adafruit.com/adafruits-raspberry-pi-lesson-5-using-a-console-cable/enabling-serial-console) with 3 - Interface Options / I6 - Serial Port / Finish
5. `wget https://cloud.nabu.ca/linux-arm.zip`
6. `unzip linux-arm.zip`
7. `rm linux-arm.zip`
8. Rename the folder using `mv linux-arm nabu-ia`
9. `ln -s /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libdl.so.2 libdl.so` is a SYM Link required to keep Raspian from crashing
9. `chmod +x ./NABU-Internet-Adapter-84`
10. `./nabu-ia/NABU-Internet-Adapter-84`

If the application is working, its now time to connect the Raspberry Pi to the NABU.

## Join the Fun

Don't miss the retro-computing fun. <font color="red">SUBSCRIBE</font> to my [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/stevencombs) and check out [my other posts](https://www.stevencombs.com).

Help make this content better! Leave your comments, corrections, additions, and thoughts in the comments below. You can email me at [retrocombs@icloud.com](mailto:retrocombs@icloud.com). Thanks for reading and if you are inclined, please let others know about the blog using the hashtag #retroCombs.

🕹️ retroCombs, OUT!